docs/getting-started-nak.md, before:

# Getting Started: NAK Developer

You're building an SDK, runtime, or framework that apps depend on. This guide covers creating and packaging a NAK.

See [Core Concepts](concepts.md) for terminology.

## 1. Create a NAK Skeleton

```bash
nah nak init mysdk
cd mysdk
```

This creates:
```
mysdk/
├── META/
│   └── nak.json
├── bin/
├── lib/
└── resources/
```

## 2. Edit NAK Metadata

Open `META/nak.json`:

```json
{
  "nak": {
    "id": "com.yourcompany.mysdk",
    "version": "1.0.0"
  },
  "paths": {
    "resource_root": "resources",
    "lib_dirs": ["lib"]
  },
  "environment": {
    "MYSDK_VERSION": "1.0.0"
  },
  "execution": {
    "cwd": "{NAH_APP_ROOT}"
  }
}
```

### Required Fields

| Field | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `nak.id` | Unique identifier (reverse domain notation) |
| `nak.version` | SemVer version |
| `paths.lib_dirs` | Directories containing shared libraries |

### Optional Fields

| Field | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `paths.resource_root` | Directory for NAK resources |
| `environment` | Environment variables to set |
| `execution.cwd` | Working directory for apps |

## 3. Add Libraries

Place shared libraries in `lib/`:

```
lib/
├── libmysdk.so        # Linux
├── libmysdk.dylib     # macOS
└── mysdk.dll          # Windows
```

## 4. Optional: Add a Loader

If your SDK needs to wrap app execution:

```json
{
  "loader": {
    "exec_path": "bin/mysdk-loader",
    "args_template": ["--app", "{NAH_APP_ENTRY}"]
  }
}
```

When present, the loader binary runs instead of the app directly.

### Placeholder Variables

Use in `args_template` and `cwd`:

| Variable | Value |
|----------|-------|
| `{NAH_APP_ID}` | App's ID |
| `{NAH_APP_VERSION}` | App's version |
| `{NAH_APP_ROOT}` | App's install directory |
| `{NAH_APP_ENTRY}` | App's entrypoint path |
| `{NAH_NAK_ROOT}` | NAK's install directory |

## 5. Package

```bash
nah nak pack . -o mysdk-1.0.0.nak
```

## 6. Test

Install into a NAH root:

```bash
nah --root /path/to/nah nak install mysdk-1.0.0.nak
nah --root /path/to/nah nak list
nah --root /path/to/nah nak show com.yourcompany.mysdk@1.0.0
```

## Next Steps

- [CLI Reference](cli.md) for all commands
- [SPEC.md](../SPEC.md) for the full NAK pack format

Commit message:

docs: document shell-style variable syntax and system env fallback
- Document $NAME and ${NAME} syntax in addition to {NAME}
- Document that system environment variables can be referenced
- Update getting-started-nak.md and how-it-works.md

docs/getting-started-nak.md, after:

# Getting Started: NAK Developer

You're building an SDK, runtime, or framework that apps depend on. This guide covers creating and packaging a NAK.

See [Core Concepts](concepts.md) for terminology.

## 1. Create a NAK Skeleton

```bash
nah nak init mysdk
cd mysdk
```

This creates:
```
mysdk/
├── META/
│   └── nak.json
├── bin/
├── lib/
└── resources/
```

## 2. Edit NAK Metadata

Open `META/nak.json`:

```json
{
  "nak": {
    "id": "com.yourcompany.mysdk",
    "version": "1.0.0"
  },
  "paths": {
    "resource_root": "resources",
    "lib_dirs": ["lib"]
  },
  "environment": {
    "MYSDK_VERSION": "1.0.0"
  },
  "execution": {
    "cwd": "{NAH_APP_ROOT}"
  }
}
```

### Required Fields

| Field | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `nak.id` | Unique identifier (reverse domain notation) |
| `nak.version` | SemVer version |
| `paths.lib_dirs` | Directories containing shared libraries |

### Optional Fields

| Field | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `paths.resource_root` | Directory for NAK resources |
| `environment` | Environment variables to set |
| `execution.cwd` | Working directory for apps |

## 3. Add Libraries

Place shared libraries in `lib/`:

```
lib/
├── libmysdk.so        # Linux
├── libmysdk.dylib     # macOS
└── mysdk.dll          # Windows
```

## 4. Optional: Add a Loader

If your SDK needs to wrap app execution:

```json
{
  "loader": {
    "exec_path": "bin/mysdk-loader",
    "args_template": ["--app", "{NAH_APP_ENTRY}"]
  }
}
```

When present, the loader binary runs instead of the app directly.

### Placeholder Variables

Use in `args_template`, `cwd`, and `environment`. Three syntaxes are supported:
- `{NAME}` - NAH-style (canonical)
- `$NAME` - Shell-style  
- `${NAME}` - Shell-style with braces

| Variable | Value |
|----------|-------|
| `{NAH_APP_ID}` | App's ID |
| `{NAH_APP_VERSION}` | App's version |
| `{NAH_APP_ROOT}` | App's install directory |
| `{NAH_APP_ENTRY}` | App's entrypoint path |
| `{NAH_NAK_ROOT}` | NAK's install directory |

System environment variables like `$HOME` and `$PATH` are also available.

## 5. Package

```bash
nah nak pack . -o mysdk-1.0.0.nak
```

## 6. Test

Install into a NAH root:

```bash
nah --root /path/to/nah nak install mysdk-1.0.0.nak
nah --root /path/to/nah nak list
nah --root /path/to/nah nak show com.yourcompany.mysdk@1.0.0
```

## Next Steps

- [CLI Reference](cli.md) for all commands
- [SPEC.md](../SPEC.md) for the full NAK pack format
